From down in the deep of the ocean floor we
look at the worst in the Jaws franchise and
evaluate whether or not it is as bad as its
reputation has lead us to believe.
The basics
• Jaws: The Revenge is the fourth film in
the killer shark series and would ultimately
be the last.
It followed on from the previous ‘Jaws 3-D’
which had been a big success at the box office
but panned by critics for the formula getting
old.
• And boy was getting old by now.
‘Jaws 3-D’ had shifted away from the original
setting to SeaWorld where Dennis Quaid had
to fight the shark in all the glory of 1980’s
3D technology but other than that was basically
the same old story.
• So what did that mean for ‘Jaws: The
Revenge’?
Well due to this call for something new, Producer
Sid Sheinberg decided to take the story into
a more mystical and even possibly supernatural
area.
• This meant bringing the story back to
the Brody family from ‘Jaws’ and ‘Jaws
2’.
But Roy Scheider had good enough sense to
stay away from the project so the story follows
his wife Ellen Brody being flat out convinced
that the shark is hunting her and her family
down for revenge.
• This the ridiculous element that was brought
in to make things interesting.
After killing one of her adult children the
shark then follows Ellen from Martha’s Vineyard
to the Bahamas in order to get its revenge.
• Now that in itself, sure doesn’t sound
TOO bad, stupid but so is a shark pulling
a helicopter into the water, the Jaws series
can be pretty stupid.
So does Jaws: The Revenge get all its criticism
from its stupid premise?
The Bad Stuff
• Obviously the story should be the first
thing we get out of the way.
So spoilers for 30 year old movie.
• The premise is really really stupid but
it could work if the characters were interesting
or engaging or y’know anything worth watching.
Ellen is dull to watch and so is her son Michael,
the only interesting character is Michael
Caine’s Hoagie but we’ll get to him later.
• Because of this we don’t really care
about anyone in the film so when the great
white does come for revenge it all feels a
bit meh.
The stakes are never high emotionally for
the audience
• Also this barely classifies as a feature,
its 89 minutes which means the pacing is very
quick.
Things happen without proper explanation and
key shots are missing.
At least 30 minutes of the film is Ellen looking
fearful out over the sea because she knows
somewhere out there that shark is plotting
to kill her.
• I mean who is this shark?
Is I the cousin of the original Jaws?
Son?
Godfather?
This is the fourth time this has happened,
how many sharks are out there getting angry
over the other deaths?
• Anyway another 30 minutes is Michael doing
some boring underwater tests and that leaves
with the last third is the ridiculous shark
vengeance climax.
• This end fight between man and shark…or
woman and shark is absolutely insane.
Jaws grabs Michael Caine’s plane and sinks
it.
His damn airplane!
This isn’t a shark it’s the aquatic equivenlent
to Godzilla
• So they use this sonar science thing to
drive Jaws-zilla crazy before impaling him
with a boat which causes the beast to explode.
It’s crazy and not the good kind of crazy,
it’s the kind of over the top that thinks
it’s being dramatic and fails on every level.
• Oh and did you know sharks roar when they
are in pain.
100% scientific fact.
• Okay so the story sucks, the performances
are bad …..what about the effects?
• No they are pretty bad too.
The Jaws animatronic looks terrible throughout
most of the film and the director didn’t
have the sense to do what the original did
and try and hide the awful looking thing.
It’s serviceable, there are worst sharks
in worse shark movies but it is pretty comical
to see when it’s attacking people and planes.
The film did win the Golden Raspberry that
year for special effects…so no they are
not good.
The Good Stuff
• Well this is going to be difficult…it’s
short?
• No there are actually a few slight good
things in the film which is surprising
• One of them is Hoagie.
Michael Caine is really enjoying his vacation
in the Bahamas because that’s the only reason
we can assume he decided to do the movie about
vengeance Jaws-zilla.
Because he is clearly having fun his performance
while not good does make some of the movie
bearable.
• It’s almost like he has just wandered
onto the set and couldn’t give a damn and
his presence is just great.
This really should have been titled ‘Michael
Caine’s summer holiday’
• Oh and Jaws sinks a goddamn plane!
Yes this is one that is on both sides really
depending on how you feel about super powered
sharks…I’m indifferent so both it goes.
• Seriously though the best part of the
film is probably the underwater cinematography,
while there’s not a heck of a lot the POV
sequence at the start of the film with us
seeing through the deadly super powered shark’s
revenge filled eyes is well done and provides
maybe the only piece of tension in the film.
Juxtaposition the shark attack with Christmas
carols is okay too.
Not great but it kinda works.
• Let’s see is there anything else…Oh
the score works but that’s just because
it’s still the iconic ‘dun dun dun dun
dadun’ from the original.
Speaking of things from the original the film
does this weird flashback stuff to events
in the first film and it’s made like it’s
Ellen seeing this…but all the flashbacks
are to things she wasn’t there for so…..
The Re-evaluation
• Yeah this is a bad film.
• No doubt about that, it’s lazy and boring
and stupid and hits any stride that could
be considered good or entertaining.
• The performances are dull and we don’t
care about anyone except Michael Caine and
his plane...Rest in pieces.
• This film killed finally did what the
others couldn’t and put a final end to the
shark frenzy that had happened after the huge
success of the first Jaws.
• Sometimes people forget how popular the
series was until this point, hell even this
film made a decent box office return, though
smaller than the intake of Jaws 3D.
• It was believable when Back to the Future
II came out that Jaws could keep on going
till the 19th entry would be released in the
mystical future year 2015.
But that much like flying cars was bound to
not happen.
• Can some fun be had here?
Sure depending on your love for the franchise
there are some guilty pleasure moments especially
to the end of the film.
The film isn’t poorly made on the basics,
the cinematography is serviceable and Caine
gives the film more of go then he should.
• It’s short and fairly inoffensive, it’s
not like they outrightly say that Jaws is
some magic spirit demon plotting revenge on
human beings so you can assume it’s all
in Ellen’s head that the shark is following
them.
Y’know maybe they are just really unlucky
with sharks?
• We’d give this one four exploding sharks
out of ten.